add files MolCLR (#4)
lamalab-org/toolminutes: papers/MolCLR_2024.md

---
author: Sreekanth Kunchapu
date: 2024-05-29
bibliography: ./references_MolCLR.bib
---

# Molecular contrastive learning of representations (MolCLR) via graph neural networks

## Why discussing this paper? 

I chose Wang's et al.'s paper [@wang2022molecular] for our journal club because

- Labelled datasets are hard to acquire since conducting experiments is expensive and time-consuming.

> - Labelled datasets are limited, if we train the model on the limited datasets, we might overfit the models and does not generalizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Labelled datasets are limited; if we train the model on the limited datasets, we might overfit the models.
```

in which does contrastive learning help here?

> - The authors propose a framework to learn better representations with unlabelled datasets during pretraining, the pretained model is plugged in for the downstream tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The authors propose a framework to learn better representations with unlabelled datasets during pretraining. The pretrained model is finetuned for the downstream tasks.
```

is this a reason for choosing it or a summary?

## Context

> The paper introduces MolCLR, a self-supervised learning framework that uses graph encoders to enhance molecular representations effectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The paper introduces MolCLR, a self-supervised learning framework that uses graph encoders to enhance molecular representations effectively.
```

what does it mean to "enhance" a molecular representation

## Main idea behind contrastive learning
The aim of contrastive representation learning is to develop an embedding space where similar samples are positioned closely together, whereas dissimilar samples are kept distant from each other.

![Figure taken from the blog post by Ekin Tiu illustrating the idea behind contrastive learning.](MolCLR_2024_images/Constrative learning .png)

## NT-Xent loss

The authors use a NT-Xent loss to train the graph encoders.

$$
L_{ij} = -\log \left( \frac{\exp(\text{sim}(z_i, z_j)/\tau)}{\sum_{k=1}^{2N} \mathbf{1}_{\{k \neq i\}} \exp(\text{sim}(z_i, z_k)/\tau)} \right)
$$

- `z_i` and `z_j`: Latent vectors extracted from a positive data pair.
- `N`: Batch size, indicating the number of data pairs used.
- `sim(⋅)`: Function measuring the similarity between two vectors.
- `τ`: The temperature parameter, used to scale the similarity measures in the function.

> To get more understanding, there is literature paper on contrastive learning one shoould read [@le2020contrastive].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get more understanding, [@le2020contrastive] is a review paper on contrastive learning.
```

## Overview of MolCLR framework

> - The SMILES are converted into graphs in a batch. The graphs consists of nodes and edges. Nodes represents atoms and edges represents chemical bonds of a molecule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The SMILES are converted into graphs in a batch. The graphs consist of nodes and edges. Nodes represent atoms, and edges represent the chemical bonds of a molecule.
```

> - The authors studied three types of augmentations like atom masking, bond deletion and sub-graph removal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The authors studied three types of augmentations like atom masking, bond deletion, and sub-graph removal.
```

Reviewer: why is the augmentation used?

Reviewer: i.e. why didn't they just training on pairs of 

- SMILES-A <-> SMILE-A, SMILES-B <-> SMILE-B, ... for the "positive pairs" 
- SMILES-A <-> SMILES-B, ... for the "negative pairs"

Author: > i.e. why didn't they just training on pairs of
> 
> * SMILES-A <-> SMILE-A, SMILES-B <-> SMILE-B, ... for the "positive pairs"
> * SMILES-A <-> SMILES-B, ... for the "negative pairs"

This can be possible, but without augmentations the model cannot learn different topologies of single molecule. 
with the augmentations the model could generalize better

Reviewer: Sorry for not being clear - when I post such questions, it is to indicate what questions I think the text should probably still highlight.

> - In the current work, they used sub-removal with some probability 0.25. Now, the model tries to learn hidden patterns of the molecule within the remaining subgraphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the current work, they used sub-removal with probability 0.25. Now, the model tries to learn the hidden patterns of the molecule within the remaining subgraphs.
```

what are "hidden patterns"?

Reviewer: why is this its own point and other augmentations do not have their own point? That is, why isn't this point simply merged in with the other augmentations?

Author: > why is this its own point and other augmentations do not have their own point? That is, why isn't this point simply merged in with the other augmentations?

They did some analysis on augmentations rights, out of all augmentations sub-graph removal with P=0.25 has achieved good perfoemance. 
the  sub-graph removal is combination of atom masking and bond deletion .

Reviewer: Also here I tried to highlight something that would perhaps be good to clarify in the text because it is not clear to the reader of your document.

> - The GNNs works on message passing framework, which means at each node the local neighborhood information is aggregated and updated iteratively. Finally, we obtain embeddings that poses every information about the molecule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The GNNs work based on a message-passing framework, which means at each node, the local neighborhood information is aggregated and updated iteratively. Finally, we obtain embeddings that pose every information about the molecule.
```

"pose every information" might not be the ideal phrasing

Reviewer: What you describe sounds like a simple GNN. I think it would be great to make clearer what the self-supervision here is

Reviewer: and to make clear that contrastive self-supervision is one of many other techniques

> - This embeddings are fed forwarded to the MLP (Multi Layer preceptron) with hidden units to get latent representation of the molecule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- These embeddings are fed forwarded to the MLP (Multi-Layer perceptron) with hidden units to get a latent representation of the molecule.
```

Reviewer: why is an MLP needed if you already have embeddings?

> - The loss for the similar representations should be minimized and maximized for the disimilar representations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The loss for similar representations should be minimized and maximized for the dissimilar representations.
```

I think this misses that the loss is computed over various pairs

![Overview figure for the MolCLR framework](MolCLR_2024_images/Overview figure MolCLR.png)

> For more information about GNNs and its applications check out this review paper [zhou2020graph].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about GNNs and their applications, check out this review paper [zhou2020graph].
```

## Results

> The authors tested the performance of MolCLR framework on seven benchmarks for classification task and six benchmarks for regression task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors tested the performance of MolCLR framework on seven benchmarks for classification tasks and six benchmarks for regression tasks.
```

> The authors claim that on classification task with other self-supervised learning or pre-training strategies, their MolCLR framework achieves the best performance on five out of seven benchmarks, with an average improvement of 4.0 percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors claim that on classification tasks with other self-supervised learning or pre-training strategies, their MolCLR framework achieves the best performance on five out of seven benchmarks, with an average improvement of 4.0 percent.
```

4 percent or 4 percentage points? And improvement over what?

![Table 1 shows the test performance on seven benchmarks on classifiaction task](MolCLR_2024_images/classifion benchmark.png) 

> The authors also claim that on regression tasks, MolCLR surpasses other pre-training baselines in five out of six benchmarks and achieves almost the same performance on the remaining ESOL benchmark. For QM9 dataset, MolCLR does not have comparable performable with SchNet and MGCN. As these two models are specifically designed for quantum interaction and make use of extra 3D positional information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors also claim that on regression tasks, MolCLR surpasses other pre-training baselines in five out of six benchmarks and achieves almost the same performance on the remaining ESOL benchmark. For the QM9 dataset, MolCLR does not have comparable performable with SchNet and MGCN. As these two models are specifically designed for quantum interaction and make use of extra 3D positional information.
```

- "does not have comparable performable with" is awkward 
- what do you mean with "designed for quantum interaction"?

![Table 2 shows the test performance on seven benchmarks on classifiaction task](MolCLR_2024_images/regression benchmark.png)

## Analysis of molecule graph augmentations

> The authors employed four augmentation strategies on the classification benchamarks. In four of the augmentations, subgraph removal with probability 0.25 has better performance in (ROC-AUC %) all of the benchmarks except in BBBP benchmark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authors employed four augmentation strategies on the classification benchmarks. In four of the augmentations, subgraph removal with probability 0.25 performed better in (ROC-AUC %) all of the benchmarks except in the BBBP benchmark.
```

- "performed better" than what? the other augmentations?

> The reason might be that model structures are sensitive in BBBP benchmark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason might be that model structures are sensitive in BBBP benchmark.
```

"sensitive to what" and why is the augmentation strategy showing that?

> They also tested MolCLR framework on the same classification benchmark using GIN model with and without augmentation. With augmentations the model achieves superior performance than without augmentations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also tested the MolCLR framework on the same classification benchmark using a GIN model with and without augmentation. With augmentations the model achieves superior performance than without augmentations.
```

GIN in the MolCLR framework or GIN in a supervised fashion with augmentations?

![Figure 2 shows the investigation of molecule graph augmentations on classification benchmarks](MolCLR_2024_images/Augmentation analysis.png)

## Investigation of MOlCLR representation
The authors examined the representations learned by pretrained MOlCLR using t-SNE embedding. This method groups similar chemicals together in two-dimensional space. In Figure 3, they show a picture of 100,000 molecules from the validation set of PubChem database showing similar/dissimilar molecules learned by MolCLR pretraining. 

![Figure 3 Visualization of molecular representations learned by MolClr via t-SNe](MolCLR_2024_images/T-SNE visualization.png)

> For instance, the three molecules shown on the top possess carbonyl groups connected with aryls. The two molecules shown on the bottom left have similar structures, where a halogen atom (fluorine or chlorine) is connected to benzene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, the three molecules on the top possess carbonyl groups connected with aryls. The two molecules on the bottom left have similar structures, where a halogen atom (fluorine or chlorine) is connected to benzene.
```

> Therefore, leaerned representations are not random but they are meaningful representations without the label information.

Reviewer: what do you mean here with "without the label information."?

> In addition to this, the authors also query molecule from the PubcChem with ID 42953211 and the closest nine similar molecules are retrevied along with RDKFP and ECFP similarities labelled. It is observed that these selected molecules share the same functional groups, including alkyl halides (chlorine), tertiary amines, ketones and aromatics. A thiophene structure can also be found in all the molecules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the authors also query a molecule from PubcChem with ID 42953211, and the closest nine similar molecules are retrieved along with RDKFP and ECFP similarities. These selected molecules share the same functional groups, including alkyl halides (chlorine), tertiary amines, ketones, and aromatics. A thiophene structure can also be found in all the molecules.
```
did they only do this for one molecule?
